Title:

	Welcome to the Simplex: analyzing your microbiome datasets as compositions

Instructors:

	Gregory Gloor, Professor of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario
	Jean Macklaim, Post Doctoral Researcher, University of Western Ontario

Summary:

Findings from microbiome datasets in one lab are often irreproducible in another. For example, there was essentially no overlap of the taxa identified as distinguishing non-alcoholic fatty liver disease disease from health in 6 primary research papers. In part, this irreproducibility is a consequence of the use of inappropriate analysis methods.

Data generated by high throughput sequencing has a constraint on the number of read counts imposed by the machine - for example, the same library will give different numbers of reads per feaature (OTU or gene) when sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq or HiSeq instrument. Thus, the number of reads observed for a given sample gives no information on the number of molecules in the underlying sample, and indeed any dataset that can be reduced to a proportion or a relative abundance is a composition. These data are called compositional data, and must be treated as such for analysis. Compositional data behave very differently than normal count data since only relative information is availble. Thus, operations such as addition and subtraction are not valid - meaning common statistical tests are misleading. Furthermore,  covariance and correlation have unpredictable outcomes - meaning clustering, ordination and network analysis give spurious and unreliable outputs.

Compositional data can be analyzed properly by examining only the ratios between features, since this information is conserved no matter the sequencing depth. Participants enrolled in this short course will be introduced to the compositional data analysis toolkit, and how to adapt it to microbiome, transcriptome or metagenome datasets. These datasets are sparse, containing many 0 values, and particular attention will be paid to showing how to adapt compositional data analysis to such data. In particular participants will

1) learn how to use and interpret compositional biplots for exploratory analysis of their datasets.
2) learn to apply compositionally appropriate methods for outlier detection.
3) learn how to conduct robust differential abundance analysis.
4) learn how to use and interpret compositional association as a replacement for correlation between features.

Students should bring their own laptop with an up-to-date version of the R statistical programming language installed. Students are encouraged to bring their own datasets for analysis, and example datasets will be posted online. A list of readings and R packages required for the course will be available upon registration.
